---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Computer Controlled Tribes

So much for the Player-versus-Player tribal propaganda, how does this affect computer-controlled tribes? This depends
entirely on what type of computer-controlled tribe you have Influence with, as follows:

---

## INDEPENDENT TRIBES

These are the Independent Men (Tribe No. 51), Elves (52), Dwarves (53), Orcs (54), Kobolds (55) and Halflings (56) not
aligned with any of the established (player-controlled) 42 tribes. They too control settlements, including Gem Mines,
but are scattered around the land and are no real match for a player-controlled tribe in any particular area. However
their armies can be hired as mercenaries, which makes them useful for campaigning in terrain not to your own troops'
liking, but they will only offer their services if their Independent 'tribe' is Parleying with your people, which only
the Independents of your own Race are at the start of the game. To get the others to Parley with you (and vice versa),
you will need to Influence them to +20% or greater, then use Political Propaganda on your own people in favour of the
Independent tribe (raising their Influence with your people to +20% or more), allowing you to declare Parleying in
return without morale loss. When you are mutually Parleying, an Independent will offer regiments for hire should you
meet.

---

## MERCENARY TRIBES

The tribes of the Centaurs (45), Drow (46), Rock Trolls (47), Ogres (48), Minotaurs (49) and Dryads (50) work very much
like Independent tribes above in terms of the need for Indluence to cause Parleying and be able to hire troops. However,
at game-start you will find your tribe to be already Allied to one of these, Parleying with three others, neutral to
another, but mutually hostile with the last. These are racial traits and reflected in the game by the Influence (or lack
thereof) held by each tribe with the other, past friendships and wars. They are all of course susceptible to Mass
Propaganda and Transfer Orders for Influence.

---

## NPC TRIBES

Your tribe begins the game parleying with the Malkahai (43), Allied to the Babulska (57), but Hostile to the
Mazdrakians (44) and Curazck (58), due to positive or negative influence held by these races with your people. The
Malkahai and Babulska are both merely Neutral in return (the Mazdrakians & Curazck - Chaos Servants - are of course
Hostile in return), as you do not possess any influence with them. The Malkahai will be fairly cheap to influence but
the Babulska will be tremendously expensive as they are by far the most prolific race in the land. They have no
settlements of their own, being largely nomadic, but they have a small community in EVERY other settlement anywhere in
the land and their gaily-painted caravans can be seen frequently crisscrossing every region of Medokh's World. The
Babulska has prospered so because they have never been a threat to any other race, and now it is said none could do much
even if the Babulska chose to take their territory!

---

## DROPOUT NPC TRIBES

And finally, these are the ex-player tribes (1-42) which have reverted to being computer-controlled at some time in the
game. Influence here is aimed at gaining allies, pure and simple, as Dropouts are staunchly loyal to their trusted
allies and will always be ready to pitch into your enemies with far more gusto than the original player would have been
inclined to. They will expect Alliances to be mutual, however, so you will need to convince your own people of the
wisdom of this - through Mass Propaganda in the Dropout's favour - before declaring your Alliance in return. Note that
Influence with tribal populations if not altered by a player dropping a position: the people of that tribe will still
remember their friends and enemies.

---

## INFLUENCE CONCLUSION AND NOTES

1. Don't worry too much if you cannot grasp the Influence system straight away. Take your time, and in the meanwhile if
   anybody transfers you cash, spend double this amount with [MP] [Their Tribe No.] [102] [Amount] and it will
   significantly reduce or totally remove the Influence that their transfer gained with your tribe.
2. Second rule - your Town Elders will always tell you when the populace disagree with your current Declared Diplomatic
   Attitude toward another tribe, and will tell you what THEY think it should be (based on that tribe's Influence with
   your people): follow this advice if you don't perform the above Order.Don't ignore your people's views - doing so
   will cost you valuable morale.
3. Cost of MP Order or influencing another tribe from 0 to + or -20% Influence is not a great amount early in the game.
   Use it early on (Turn 2+) to gain valuable influence with Mercenary & Independent tribes.