---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Campaign World

Medokh's World is divided into 100 named Regions, and all are approximately equal in shape and size. If you look at your
starting map this will give you some idea of the dimensions of a Region, and also of how it is divded into 100 separate
areas in a 10 x 10 format. These areas are really individual movement zones, but for the sake of simplicity we shall
call them hexes.

Regions are important in game terms, since only by their names can you be sure of where you are: there are no global
coordinates for Medokh's World. The extreme outer edges of the world plane are, however, known to be protected by the
impenetratable World Wall, beyond which is the endless void of limbo in which Medokh has been imprisoned. Also, Regions
are known to run roughly in line with each other in grid fashion, making life (and mapping!) a little easier. It is for
control of Regions in which to build new settlements that tribes will fight, but in many Regions the terrain is
sufficiently diverse as to not appeal entirely to any one race, thus it is quite possible for two or more races to
inhabit the same region without having to come to blows, each in their preferred terrain. But problems may occur if two
tribes of the same, or similar, race each attempted to expand into the same Region at the same time, since the preferred
terrain will be contested.

In game terms, each Region is divided into 100 hexes for the purpose of directing movement of armies and for
ascertaining with relative ease the exact location of settlements and armies at any time during the game. Your Turn
Results will always refer to an army or settlement's location as being firstly within a particular Region, and then
within a specific hex somewhere in that Region. Hex coordinates are given from the bottom left-hand corner of the
Region, across in columns of hexes and then up in rows. For example, a location of 3,3 for Army 1 would mean 3 hexes
across and 3 hexes up, within the named Region. If in any doubt as to how this works, compare your starting Region Map (
which clearly shows your initial Fort), with the Region Location given for your Fort on the accompanying sheets of paper
detailing your starting position.

All game maps are always printed out with NORTH at the top of the sheet.

Looking at your starting map, it doesn't take a genius to soon figure out that armies cannot therefore move directly
east or west, since movement can only be made in six directions from any hex, not eight as with a square grid map. The
disadvantage of SQUARED maps is that moving diagonally one can actually move, in real terms, exactly 50% further than if
moving horizontally or vertically the same number of squares! Rather than confuse things further by bringing in a rule
about reduced movement when moving diagonally through squares, Medokh's World has been programmed in hexes simply
because movement is equal whatever direction you choose to travel (and despite the fact that programming hexes is much
more complicated in every respect!).
