---
sidebar_position: 6
---

# Influence

---

## Population Influence

Tribal Relations are not, however, as simple as they might appear to be above.

Transferring Crowns or Goods (the latter having a value equal to current average Malkahai market prices) to another
tribe, whether player-controlled, a Dropout tribe, a Mercenary tribe, an NPC tribe (eg. Malkahai & Babulska), or an
Independent Tribe, will result in your people gaining favour ('Influence') with the other tribe, rated between -100 and
+100, with most starting the campaign at zero. Similarly, you can influence your own people's view of another tribe,
favourable or unfavourably, by spending Crowns with the "Mass Propaganda" Order shown later. The purpose of all this
rigmorale is to force Version 111 Warlords to take a realistic account of their own people's attitudes when declaring
Diplomatic Attitudes: a Warlord who goes against the obvious wishes of the majority of his people will suffer
accordingly a drop in morale and loyalty, with subsequent population loss and possibly even regiment desertions. There
is only one general rule - the general populace of a tribe are not devious enough to suspect ulterior motives in free
gifts, wherever they might come from, and only clever and expensive propaganda will make them see things your way.

If your tribe has a negative or only mildly favourable view of another tribe but you insist on declaring yourself
Parleying or even Allied toward that tribe, then morale will be lost based on the degree of the difference of opinion.
The opposite is also true; if you insist on staying Neutral (or worse, even declaring Hostility) toward a tribe which
your people view very favourably, morale will also suffer. However, it does also mean that two Warlords who wish to
become mutually Allied AGAINST their respective people's current wishes, will need to "Give" each other money,
transferring it back and forth, to dupe their people into believing that a solid, friendly and mutually-trustworthy
relationship is being entered into: if they don't, both run the risk of serious morale loss by openly declaring Alliance
too early. To Parley with another tribe safely your people should view that tribe with +20% or more favourability (that
tribe's Influence with your people), and to Ally safely you should aim for +50%. To declare Hostility safely, a -20%
Influence would suffice. Between -20% and +20% Influence with your people means that you should remain outwardly Neutral
toward that tribe.

Essentially, by sending Crowns or Goods to another tribe, you can Influence them to look upon your tribe more
favourably, possible preventing an attack even if that tribe's Warlord is known to be personally Hostile toward you! No
Warlord can afford to suddenly fall out of favour with too many of his own people.

Similarly, you can spend Crowns with the "Mass Propaganda" Order to alter your own tribe's feelings (lower Influence)
about another tribe, avoiding morale loss (etc) when you do make your personal feelings and ambitions known by declaring
your tribe's future Diplomatic Attitudes.

Unfortunately, the Crowns sent to another tribe to influence them will of course end up in their Warlord's Treasury, but
rest assured that even if this was all spent in Mass Propaganda to reduce the Influence it has just gained for you, it
would only HALVE it on average, so the rival Warlord would need to spend an equal(ish) amount of his own money in order
to totally eliminate the effect of your transfer. It is not only a question of can they afford to keep doing this as
long as you can, because the effect of Influence gains by Transfers and Mass Propaganda Orders is modified by the number
and skill of Orator Individuals lending their talents to the Order, and this can make all the difference.

## Influence/Diplomacy and Government Types

Diplomacy & Influence is affected greatly by your chosen Government Type. In simple terms, all of these rules apply to a
MONARCHY exactly as stated, but there are important differences if you have a different system of Government.

The Warlord of a REPUBLIC may not alter the tribe's diplomatic standing with any other tribe (ie. you may not perform
the DD - Declare Diplomatic Attitude - Order at all). Your tribe's opinion of another tribe is still dependent on that
tribe's Influence with your people as with a Monarchy, but a Republic will declare a suitable Diplomatic Attitude
automatically. For instance, if you use Mass Propaganda with your people against another tribe so that their Influence
with your people falls below -20%, then your Republican Government will automatically declare your tribe Hostile to the
hated tribe. Similarly, if another transferred loads of Gold Crowns to your people (and into your Treasury), and thereby
boost their Influence with your people above +50%, then your Republican Government will declare your tribe to be Allied
to their new, generous friends.

A DESPOT is the opposite of a Republic. Tribal Influence can be almost entirely disregarded as unimportant - your people are not permitted to have a say as regards Diplomatic Attitudes so what they think of another tribe is of no consequence. A Despot may freely declare any Diplomatic Attitudes he or she wishes, regardless of Influence, and unlike a Monarchy would not suffer any greater morale loss for ignoring the wishes of the people of the tribe (as they wouldn't expect you to care about what they think anyway). Whilst this freedom of choice without recriminations is a tremendous advantage to a warlike leader, it should be weighed carefully against the disadvantages of being a Despot (generally poor civilian morale and a terrible economy, not to mention the very real possibility of civil disorder, uprisings and even outright rebellion).

---

## Influence Conclusion and Notes

1. Don't worry too much if you cannot grasp the Influence system straight away. Take your time, and in the meanwhile if
   anybody transfers you cash, spend double this amount with [MP] [Their Tribe No.] [102] [Amount] and it will
   significantly reduce or totally remove the Influence that their transfer gained with your tribe.
2. Second rule - your Town Elders will always tell you when the populace disagree with your current Declared Diplomatic
   Attitude toward another tribe, and will tell you what THEY think it should be (based on that tribe's Influence with
   your people): follow this advice if you don't perform the above Order.Don't ignore your people's views - doing so
   will cost you valuable morale.
3. Cost of MP Order or influencing another tribe from 0 to + or -20% Influence is not a great amount early in the game.
   Use it early on (Turn 2+) to gain valuable influence with Mercenary & Independent tribes.